slug: about
title: Mock Trial at the University of Chicago
<!-- title: About the Program -->



## What does Mock Trial do?

Mock Trial reenacts the argument of a case at the trial level in the
fictional state of Midlands. Each team takes a side in the case -
either the prosecution for criminal cases and plaintiff for defense
cases, or the defendant - and divides its members into teams, each
made up of attorneys and witnesses. Each team usually has around 10
members.

**Attorneys** help to advance the case through opening and closing
  statements, by directly questioning the witnesses on their side, and
  destroying the credibility of witnessses on the other side by
  cross-examining them.

It's the **witnesses'** job, then, to bolster their side of the case
by fending off the aggressive and revealing questions of the other
attorney. This is where acting becomes important. A grieving mother or
knavish journalist presented with convincing, lifelike emotion may win
the judges over to give us an indisputable victory.

The entire trial is subject, of course, to constraints that make it
both challenging and fun. Witnesses must stay on script: that is,
their story or evidence must be consistent with what is written in
their _affidavit_ (basically a written testimony) in the case
materials provided by the American Mock Trial Association. Both sides
must pay careful attention to the Rules of Evidence, which governs
what questions and answers each party may ask and give.

A mock trial round has three attorneys and three witnesses on each
side of the case; each attorney conducts the direct examination of one
witness, and the cross of an opposing witness. Two of the three
attorneys also give speeches; one gives the five-minute opening
statement, one gives the nine-minute closing argument.

At the college level, Mock Trial is different from similar high school
competitions. In short, the rules are stricter, not all objections are
available, and there are some changes in terminology. Ask any of our
executive officers if you would like to know more about the
differences in rules.

## How do we win?

Unlike a typical court case, where one side is declared victorious, or
an appellate court moot where both a winner on the law and a winner on
merit are chosen, mock trials are only judged based on merit. Two
judges score each round, independently, and give up to 10 points to
each component of the trial. Each attorney is scored on his or her
speech (if any), direct, and cross; each witness is scored on their
direct performance and cross performance. The points are then added up
and the team with more points wins. Since each round has two judges,
it's possible for one judge to give one team the victory and the other
judge to award it to the other team.

## How do tournaments work?

Each tournament has four rounds; at a tournament, each team will
compete as the prosecution/plaintiff twice and as the defense
twice. With two judges per round there is a maximum of eight "ballots"
(judges' score sheets) to win. The team that wins the most, wins the
tournament.
